why do we see a generation growing up in
the way they are with sort of an
undeniable um I guess less of an ability
to regulate their emotions in previous
generations how much of it is due to
their inborn temperament how much of it
is due to being differences and how they
were reared but also how much of is due
to differences in the larger cultural
milu and how that's influencing um their
decisions perhaps consciously to
regulate or not regulate their emotions
[Music]
hello everybody I'm speaking today with
Dr JD haltigan Dr haltigan is a
developmental
psychologist uh with a real interest in
Psychopathology the study of mental
illness and the manner in which it
develops in relationship to such things
as early childhood experience and so
he's also quite a
pronounced and courageous voice on
social media which is really where I
first came across him there are a lot of
crazy things going on in the
psychological community at the moment
and so uh haltigan is one of the few
voices in the psychological
community that are properly expressing
dismay at the state of the culture and
of the profession and so I've been
following him watching what he's doing
and appreciating it and learning more
about his story you know he's he's a
pretty good researcher certainly good
enough
to good enough so that he should have a
at minimum a decent academic job and
maybe good enough so that he should have
an excellent one but instead he's
working at a deli because he decided
he'd ra rather have his conscience than
his position and uh that's you know
impressive so I thought I'd reach out to
him and have a chat and I know my wife
has done the same on her podcast
platform that's Tammy Peterson and so
join us hello Dr haltigan thanks for
joining me today very pleasure to meet
you Jordan here on uh our call and it
was a very pleasure to see you here in
Pittsburgh and great to meet you as well
here let's start by talking about who
you are and what you do just what what
we walk you why don't you walk everybody
through your well let's let's go into
your graduate education we'll start
there and walk people through and so
they get a sense of what you do but also
what position you're in at the moment
and why sure so my my academic
trajectory was um my my graduate
academic trajectory started really after
I did some uh Residential Treatment work
in Upstate New York here in the states
and then I did my PhD in developmental
psych at the University of Miami in
Florida um and I was really interested
interested in that time in attachment
Theory and uh the adviser I work with
there was doing some early early stage
autism work so I kind of looked at
attachment in the context of early risk
for autism and then subsequent to Miami
I did a couple of post dos one of which
at the University of Illinois was with
an advisor who was fairly prominent in
the attachment literature um and I
trained on things like uh you know
measures that are kind of um
conventional for the attachment
developmental tradition like the adult
attachment interview and the strange
situation I can discuss those later but
I did that and then I kind of kept doing
post dos and and trying to find the
tenure track position in in Academia and
psychology and it was just so difficult
um ended up going to the University of
Ottawa to to do another postto and
that's when kind of things sort of uh
transitioned I was there for two years
to T taught some courses and at the end
of the day was recruited down to uh the
center for addiction of Mental Health in
Toronto which I'm sure you're familiar
with and uh that's where I got my
appointment at UFT in Psychiatry and was
there from about 2016 to 2023 and that
appointment ended and that was kind of
right around the time 2016 2023 when
things were getting a little woke in the
academy and you know I was getting
increasingly uncomfortable with some of
the research and and how it was being
conducted and what we were able to say
about mental health um and early
development and came back to to
Pittsburgh which is where I'm here today
and and really trying to stay involved
in Academia in any way that I can and
get through this period of uh what I
consider to be um woke Insanity for lack
of a better term and uh working some odd
you know oddend jobs Blue Collar jobs at
a local Deli to kind of make it while
continuing to write about some of this
stuff and to use my platform to speak
about some of these issues like the the
gender stuff and and other things that
I've researched in my career okay good
well that's great Grist for the Mills so
why don't we start by having you explain
to everybody well two things why don't
you tell them what developmental
psychology is broadly speaking who the
Masters are in the field and what
attracted you to it and then zoom in a
little bit more particularly on
attachment theory Sure so developmental
psychology is more or less a study of of
Development Across the Life Span from
from the Cradle to the Grave which was
one of the uh earlier terms that John
BBY the the sort of originator of
attachment Theory came up with so across
birth to to death and we look at how uh
individuals develop how they develop
their cognitive skills how they develop
their emotional
capacities um in particular you know the
earli stages of life and infancy how the
uh relationship with parents impacts
that the development of of language the
development of um you know a theory of
mind for example and other other things
um and some of the earlier umu stuff
that happens in adolescence the crisis
of identity uh is another big one and
then in aging which is not really my
focus I was always early infancy to to
um middle childhood but in aging you
study the Sim similar things the decline
of mental faculties um uh emotional
capacities in old age and and so forth I
guess some of the big names that
listeners might be aware of in terms of
Developmental Psy would be p u maybe
bulby a little bit less so but if
they're if they're interested in in
developmental psych Bobby would be a
name that would come up certainly some
of the old school theorists um played a
role in developmental psych as well I
mean the the tradition of Freud and so
forth um definitely played a role and
some of that but I would say PJ vaski is
another one the Russian psychologist who
studied um language acquisition and how
that impacted uh emotional development
um and cognitive Mastery of the
environment and the child's ability to
to learn so those would be some of the
the the people that I would associate or
would think that some people might
recognize as developmental
psychologist yeah so Freud I mean Freud
at least attempted uh taxonomy and a
classification of Developmental stages
and uh you know I think he actually made
some pretty good contributions to our
understanding of of Parental
relationships in so far as they impact
psychopath pathology I mean my sense
especially in modern times I'd like your
take on this is that Freud's
specification of the edle complex was a
major step forward in identification of
well much of the pathology that
characterizes the modern world I mean
it's a variant of really what Freud was
pointing to in a rather oblique way
because he tended to sexualize
everything Freud was very convinced that
the fun mental motivating factor in
human beings could be construed in a
relatively unitary Manner and that sex
occupied that place although he also was
concerned with the impulse towards death
but Freud certainly pointed out that the
Instinct that mothers have to love and
care for their infants was also
something that if it went wrong could
pose a
remarkably pervasive Danger to those
same infants and the psychoanalysts for
example posited that the good mother
necessary necessarily fails and so and
that stemmed from the Freudian tradition
the idea that the mother was in this
uncomfortable position of having to make
a transition from the indefinite amount
of care that has to be poured into a
newborn who's completely helpless to the
facilitation of the relative autonomy
that a toddler requires and then
obviously older children and Adolescence
and Freud pointed
out highlighted let's say the fact that
a mother who extended her concern for
the infant past its due date could then
pose a major threat to the developing
psyche and I think he got that right and
then of course Yung and his followers
followed that up especially Eric noyman
with their descriptions of the symbolism
and mythology associated with the
devouring mother and I can't help but
see in the pathologization of the
current administrative environment let's
say particularly in universities and
also in the K through 12 system the all
the Hallmarks of a maternal Instinct
gone absolutely Stark raving mad so that
everything becomes an infant and if it
isn't an infant then it's likely a
predator and that's a bad situation to
be in if you're either the infant and or
the predator and you actually happen to
be neither so um any comments about that
like part of the reason I wanted to talk
to you I think is
because
my I've been following you on Twitter
for a long time and you're one of the
very few
psychologists yeah they could probably
be listed on one hand who's willing to
make a case for the developmental
Psychopathology that's associated with
the current C culture war and so I'm I'm
kind of wondering how you canr that and
then we'll get back to some of these
more fundamental developmental theorists
yeah I'm glad you brought up Freud and
how he kind of you know some of his
contributions because I see Freud's work
as mostly a cultural psychologist um I
think Freud like you said he he
sexualized everything people have
dismissed him out of hand because that
and kind of and in some ways rightfully
so if you're a psychological scientist
but from a cultural perspective when
you're looking at what's happening now
in our culture he was really indeed on
to something and you mentioned the good
enough and that's kind of where I
departed and where attachment Theory
departs a little bit from Freud the
object relation school like uh winot
Donald Wood W Donald Woods wincott who
was the famous British
psychoanalyst um and then BBY following
from him they kind of broke away from
Freud in fact BBY was excluded from uh
the British psychoanalytic Society
because he focused on the the
environment what was actually happening
in the world and to the infant rather
than in some fantasy world and and
really when Ott's notion of the good
enough mother was that she would fail or
the good enough caregiver would fail in
other words they wouldn't suffocate um
the infant or try to be too perfect and
so that's kind of a critical concept
that is really happening in in as I see
it in the world today the sort of
overprotectiveness or Suffocation of um
children's ability because children have
to you know grow up and develop and
master cognitively master the
environment and so if you constantly
Shield them from any challenges or
impingements as wott might say on the
environment um you're necessarily going
to restrict their ability to adapt to
that well we we should point out too
what that failure of adaptation means is
that so A Child who's intimidated by a
novel situation will turn a young child
will turn to their caregiver their
mother or father or substitute to
regulate their anxiety when a challenge
is conf fronts them that their emotions
indicate might be too large to master
and so what the good enough parent does
is replace that need for dependency on
an external source with competence and
skill on behalf of the child now the
problem with that and I think Freud and
certainly the unions as well got this
right is
that for a mother whose status and sense
of moral super
interiority depends on that relationship
with her child maybe her emotional
dependency is there too the fact of that
child's Dawning competence actually
poses a threat to her psychological
integrity and that I think becomes
particularly relevant when we're
discusting discussing let's say cluster
B psych mothers with cluster B
Psychopathology who are very very
immature and narcissistic themselves
like toddlers let's say and who are
unable in consequence to attend to the
child without putting their own
emotional personal emotional needs first
and foremost need for status need for
love need for security need for
belonging all those sorts of things that
shouldn't be there twisting
and dementing the child's pathway
forward and so that also G I guess gives
a root into discussing developmental
Psychopathology in the relationship I've
read for example that up to 50% of
mothers whose children progress with
trans surgery for example have some
variant of the cluster B personality
disorders yes and I I think um cluster B
personality disorders in the attachment
literature would track what we call um
preoccupation with the attachment Rel
ship in other words there's sort of some
inability of in this case uh you know
typically the the mother to to extract
herself from uh whatever she was dealing
with in her own you know early childhood
or or around those sorts of
relationships with her own parental
figures and this preoccupation is a
constant uh Focus or hyperfocus a hyper
affective focus on aspects of the of the
relationship and so what happens is is
that they regulate the parent regulates
their own sense of uh satisfaction or
affirmation through their child and so
it's kind of exactly what you're
suggesting is that the child is
basically placed in the position a
reverse position of providing the the
the sort of emotional satisfaction for
the parent that the parent would
otherwise sort of seek to establish in
the child a sense of competence a sense
of direction in the world and so it's
kind of an inverted um what we call role
reverse relationship and that's very
toxic for for a child who has to in
other words to to adapt to the
environment develop his own sense of
Mastery and incompetence but when it's
inverted like that um the the caregiver
in the most cases the mother will place
that burden on the child and so that's
kind of where you see that inversion of
course that leads to all all sorts of
Psychopathology in the child uh
certainly influences it in terms of a
weak identity structure inability to
regulate their own emotions and the
child's constant focus on pleasing the
the caregiver or the mother at the risk
of if they don't they're going to lose
that that source of caregiving that that
protects them and is their source of uh
parental love and Authority right well
and they face the additional problem
those children that the parent let's say
most often in this case the mother
cluster B fathers tend to be absent so
cluster B mothers tend to be present and
so we should outline for our viewers ERS
and listeners what cluster B consists of
so that's a that's a uh grouping of
statistically and symptomatically
related pathologies of Personality that
include histrionic and so that's kind of
the modern variant of of the Freudian
hysteric who's very dramatic and
overemotional narcissistic and so
narcissistic people with narcissistic
personality disorder are always
attempting to Garner unearned social
status and
attention um Psychopathic which is
callous and
unfeeling uh very very self-centered
very present focused um and antisocial
and that's more associated with
criminality per se that particular
variant is more common among men
especially in its more violent forms as
I said those sort of fathers tend to be
absent so now part of the problem if
you're a child and you have a mother
with cluster B Psychopathology is that
not only are you called upon to attend
to her unmet emotional needs constantly
but there is actually no way of Meeting
those needs I mean treating cluster B
people is notoriously difficult and
stressful for even a very practiced
therapist who's only around some of the
time for a child it's um filling a pit
that is so deep that our lifetimes of
work lifetime of work would not be
sufficient to you know fill it to the
brim so let's why don't you tell us a
little bit about how let's tie that into
attachment Theory and how that develops
we can focus a bit on the
multigenerational transmission of
familial emotional
pathology well yeah I think it's
important to consider that uh
multigenerational transmission from both
the sort of biological and the social
perspectives and that means that there
there will be some inherent dispositions
on the part of um caregivers to be you
know we all have our own Baseline levels
of emotional regulation but the actual
social relationship of Early Childhood
is is critical to sort of fine-tune or
to calibrate the ability to emotionally
regulate um so we have we all have a
baseline of the ability to regulate our
emotions and so forth but it's really
that early caregiving relationship that
kind of fine tunes or calibrates it and
if that fails um what you end up having
is a complete failure and inability to
regulate emotions and that's kind of
what we see um in some of the cluster B
histrionic um um preoccupied discourse
or personality disorders and so when
that continues generationally it
basically perpetuates itself and
propagates itself from parent to child
and child to to the Next Generation so
um I think it's important for listeners
to understand that if if the if there's
a failure to regulate or to sort of
scaffold the infant and child in
developing their own regulations that's
going to persist until there is some
corrective course or it won't there
won't be any corrective course and I
think that's kind of what we're seeing
now is that a lot of these failures have
sort of aggregated in the culture and
you're seeing that play out at sort of a
more of a macrosocial
level this month marks 2 years since the
overturning of roie Wade but did you
know that the number of abortions has
actually increased since then new
estimates show that more than 1 million
babies were killed by abortion in 20123
the highest number of abortions in over
a decade the overturning of roie Wade
has unfortunately made the abortion pill
more readily available now accounting
for up to 64% of all abortions but
pre-born continues to stand strong
rescuing 200 lives every day pre-born is
the largest pro-life organization in the
country they provide free ultrasounds to
mothers with unplanned pregnancies to
introduce them to the precious life
growing inside of them when a mother
meets her baby on ultrasound and hears
their heartbeat she is twice as likely
to choose life how can you help one
ultrasound costs only $28 and could be
the difference between life and death
please join the fight by sponsoring one
two or more ultrasounds if you have the
means you can sponsor pre-born entire
network for a day for
$5,000 all gifts are tax deductible and
whatever gift you give will go towards
saving lives to donate dial pound 250
and say the keyword baby that's pound
250 keyword baby or go to pre-born
docomo that's preborn
docomo so let's I'm going to walk you
through a very brief description of a
what let's call it a summary of proper
infant development and then I'll like
you to comment on that and fles it out
or offer criticisms if you will so you
could imagine this neurologically and
practically so an infant comes into the
world with uh a few primary emotions
which develop across time a few primary
motivations and a few um wired up motor
skills skills for action and perception
so a child very early a very uh young
child an infant can focus his eyes or
her eyes on the face of the mother at
about the distance from breast to
mother's face the
sucking re reflex it's not precisely
reflex because it's more sophisticated
than that the child's mouth and tongue
are quite developed when the child's
born you can imagine an animal like a um
a deer or a moose something like that
very soon after they're born they can
stand up and walk or even run human
infants can't but we do come equipped
into the world with some hard wiring and
our lips and our tongues work pretty
well and so we can latch onto a nipple
say and and uh it's partly also why very
young children put things in their mouth
because the motor and sensory apparatus
of the tongue and lips are there the
child sort of develops from that outward
it develops from the center outward um
the basic motiv emotional structure is
positive and negative emotion but it
works on a very very short-term basis
and it's very focused on the immediate
needs of the child and so and those
emotions are very intense and all
consuming and they can the negative
emotions can include pain it's there at
the beginning anger that's there very
early fear that develops about when the
child starts to become to be able to
move and on the positive emotional side
well interest uh excitement enthusiasm
certainly the capacity for love those
are all there
um what what the parent and the social
environment is trying to
do with
that panoply of motivations and emotions
is
to further the skill development but
also help the child learn to integrate
its emotions in a playful manner
with the family and then a broader
social community and to facilitate that
movement from egocentricity to
thoroughly engaged social play and Rough
and Tumble play helps with that and so
does the more subtle forms of play that
a mother might engage in and hopefully
that gets to the point where by the age
of about three a child that would
otherwise be egocentric and Hyper
emotional is now able to take the dance
of another person and start to develop
the ability to play and
to engage in turn-taking
reciprocal friendships and then those
friendships scaffold further development
from the age of four onward and the best
evidence that I had come across and I
haven't reviewed this literature for a
long time was that there was something
like a critical stage of development for
play between the ages of two and four
such that if a more aggressive and
emotional child wasn't socialized into
proper play Behavior by the age of four
it was very difficult for them to
establish friendships and they tended to
fall further and further behind and to
be isolated and alienated and sometimes
criminal for the rest of their lives so
anyways that's my memory of the
developmental literature and a nutshell
and so elaborate on that criticize that
tell me what you think about that as a
model
I think as a model that's kind of a
broad generalized overview that's pretty
on point I would I would say our our
sort of understanding of critical points
of time is still in a is fluid we're
still looking at that in the literature
but I'm glad you brought up sort of the
the Basic Instincts and D because I was
just discussing this um the other day on
another show that the best sort of
analogy or best sort of um understanding
to give your listeners would be there's
a paradigm in infant research called the
face to-face still face Paradigm and and
basically what that is is it illustrates
everything you just said with remarkable
Clarity basically the Paradigm is this
it's a well-known Paradigm in
developmental tradition usually an
infant and a and a mother is brought
into the lab or in in some cases his
father too I don't want to emphasize the
mother but in most cases that is true
and you place the infant in a car seat
um in in front of the mother or the
caregiver and you have them looking at
each other they're separated by maybe a
little bit of space and the Paradigm is
this you have 3 minutes of free play
where the where the mother usually
engages facially and communicatively
with the infant then you have a
two-minute period where the mother sits
back kind of like I'm doing now and
maintains a
completely still face and then you have
a follow-up three minute period where
they resume interaction and one of the
best replicated effects in all of infant
literature is during that still face
when the parent cuts off that social
communication those facial gestures
the infant's negative aect just Rockets
up and I've seen this in a lab myself
crying squirming in the car seat and so
forth and then typically we call that
the still face effect and then in the
reunion once there's a reproach mall and
the mother engages typically or the
caregiver engages back with this
emotional communication gestures um like
you said sort of social play the infant
is still highly negative in AFF effect
but there's sort of a a dead of that
sort of towards a more positive
effective tone typically by the end of
that three minutes there's some sort of
reintegration and that little
encapsulated 8 Minute sequence right
there illustrates in in sort of a a
tight way what's happening all across
infancy and childhood and so what we can
see from that procedure is that if
there's in inability of sort of the
reunion effect if there's still
consistent negativity you kind of get a
window into how that socialization
process C is maybe going um and so
during the reunion what we typically see
is that the uh the caregiver will work
to re-engage you know to to lessen the
negative effect in the infant and so um
that's kind of the basic sort of uh
analogy to use even in in later
development is the what the idea is that
the parent is Scaffolding in many ways
that regulation of emotion and as the
child ages that includes things like um
letting the child explore the
environment what if the child is out and
playing you know on the street has a
fall um they're injured how does that
process of seeking Comfort work out and
how does the parent regulate sort of the
need for autonomy from uh a need for uh
closeness and some sort of protection as
the child
grows right well and we should we should
point out too that this is a very tricky
business in the real world for parents
to negotiate not least because children
very widely in their intrinsic levels of
negative emotion and so there are
children who are by temperament they're
much more likely to become upset but
also once upset are much more difficult
to soothe and so how in the lab do you
separate out or can you at all the
competence of the parent in re in
reestablishing that relationship and the
intrinsic sensitivity or trait
neuroticism of the child Who's involved
well that's kind of what what gets down
to the heart of the methodology about
some of this work that's been so
degraded with the current uh Insanity
that we're living through in the academy
is that we have these gold standard
measures that measure infant temperament
which is essentially personality and
infant and we have measures that we have
you know coded observational protocols
to look at uh how sensitive for example
the parent is being to towards the child
in a free play setting or the still face
how much do they look how much do they
engage and you can code all of that and
then you can look at that in a
multivariable uh analytic framework um
so that's one way to do that but uh what
you point out with sort of the basic
instinctual drives um as well as the
sort of social influence is crucial
because now there's sort of a hyperfocus
on the only reason that uh for example
an infant or a child could become uh
screwed up in in away or maladjusted is
from social influences there's never a
proper accounting of the that
temperament does play some children are
much more difficult to soothe and that's
why winad and others Beyond him
emphasize that the parents role is not
to be perfect they got to do the best
they can to to manage those different
levels of Baseline negative affectivity
and other sort of intrinsic
characteristics of their child but
there's become a constant hyperfocus in
today's culture about this idea of
perfection and the perfect child or the
perfect environment and I think that has
led to a lot of the sort of the the
notion of the Suffocation or the
devouring mother that is actually you
know anical to healthy development you
might say as a rule of
thumb that the combined influence of the
mother and father should be about as
positive and about as negative as the
typical potentially social interaction
that a child's likely to have in the
world right so you can think of parents
as caregivers but as the child mures the
parents should also become proxies for
the actual social world that the child's
most likely to encounter so one of the
reasons that disciplinary strategies are
necessary with regards to the fostering
of infant and toddler development is
that parents obviously have to prepare
their children to behave in the real
world and that means that the child has
to learn to integrate their
emotions into a framework of behavior
and attention that other people find
attractive and inviting and that the see
when when I worked in the developmental
field which was back in the mostly in
the '90s
mid90s to say mid
2000s the first decade of the 2000s I
was struck and hurt in some ways by the
fact that the destiny of children who
aren't well socialized between that age
of two and four is pretty damn dismal
and it really struck home for me the
necessity of parents to do everything
they could to encourage another Instinct
in their children which is that instinct
towards Mastery and integration you know
we talked about the instinctual basis of
negative emotion and positive emotion
but there's also an instinct towards
integration which is probably associated
with the transfer of Behavioral control
from the more primordial and immediate
emotional systems to the more distal and
social systems that are mediated by the
by the cortex which is takes a lot more
socialization so to speak to
program and so the reason that parents
need to regulate the emotions of their
children is first of all so their
children won't be suffering as a
consequence of the domination of their
negative emotion but also so that other
people can appreciate or even stand
having their children around so they'll
play with them and educate them and so
if
you're at the beck and call of your
Infant
constantly and you're doing that in part
because you can't tolerate any distress
on the part of the infant
or
you're covertly re rewarding the
infant's infantile Behavior so that he
or she won't leave then you're
absolutely
devastating their you're you're
destroying the possibility that they're
going to be able to have friends and and
thrive in the world and so why do you
think do you think there's any evidence
that that developmental process has been
interfered with at a societal level now
well that's right what you said Is Right
completely a fair description of sort of
this process of impulse control
development and so forth and I think you
know there's a lot of a work that has
been done um regarding sort of
broad-based Trends and sort of
helicopter parenting um or you know
parental uh over involvement and I think
that's exactly what's happening at least
it's some sort of generalized level uh
in the larger culture if there's an
inability for the child to engage the
environment because they're constantly
dependent on the parent for whatever
reason either to fulfill the parents
needs of Their Own emotional
satisfaction or to fulfill the child's
need who's never told you know you need
to explore the environment what you see
is an inability to regulate the you know
the impulses and that ends up in uh you
know down the road a complete failure
and that's kind of what you see in the
phenotype of some of this cluster be
stuff we're seeing play out on the tent
cities and these and these campus
protests for example even in 2020 with a
lot of the rioting um it's just sort of
this completely emotionally
disregulated um behavior and that's
Downstream from the millennial
generation being raised in sort of this
different way than was you know 30 40
years ago where the child went out they
explored they they you know a lot of
sort of uh commentators have noted you
know you went and played it on the
street till it got dark and you came
home that isn't happening anymore and so
what is the sort of effect or can we
sort of quantify in some way what that's
doing I think there's definitely
evidence for this playing out there
there's definitely you know evidence for
an influence of some of this over
protection um but in terms of and this
is one of the things that the ideologues
in the academy will do is they want you
to sort of mechanistically find grain
measure this and make the case for it in
sort of a mechanistic way and that's
sort of the the challenge that someone
like me is faced with we can see with
our own eyes these Trends playing out
but then how do we frame it in an
academic methodological way to make the
case and I think we we are at that point
but there has to be room in the academy
to investigate these questions they
can't be censored they can't be um you
know allowed to be not asked and so you
know grant money needs to be funded for
those types of things but I definitely
think there's there's evidence for these
these types of large um trends that
we're seeing I mean we see in them we
see them with their own eyes and sort of
it's undeniable in the sense that you
can look at something that's happening
earlier and and you know you can see
something that's happening now and you
can make the link but the challenge is
really is really formalizing that in
some sort of methodology right yeah well
Jonathan height and and Greg lukinov
have been struggling with that
and yeah yeah yeah yeah so let me offer
some yeah sociological explanations for
this
disregulation um because I'm always
inclined to well you have to give the
devil is due and as you said said if
you're going to consider multiple
variables you consider sociological and
economic variables along with
psychological variables so tell me what
you think about these contributors so
while now we have older parents often
old enough so that under normal human
conditions they would have been
grandparents and so older parents are
more
conservative and they're also they also
tend to be richer and they have far
fewer children
so they have all their eggs in one
basket so to speak plus they're more
conservative and they can also provide
for their children in a way that makes
say no to their wants dependent on the
decision of the parent rather than the
restrictions of of their economic
circumstances so those are three big
changes right so now let's say the
typical mother is
30 let's say the and and because she's
30 Pro likely to be in
more positive economic circumstances and
therefore able to respond to the child's
demands with the provision of material
wealth then we also have the fact that
there's far fewer children in each
family and so that means each child
doesn't have to contend in what's likely
a beneficial way at least under some
circumstances with a multiplicity of
siblings with whom they have to share
the attention and resources and learn
how to get along with right in that
intense cooperative and competitive
environment that characterizes a sibling
relationship and then we also have the
additional problem of single parents or
parents with multiple relationships
who've had disrupted familial
relationships themselves then we have
the problem as well that there just
aren't as many children out on the
street there aren't mothers watching
them all the time like there were when
there were neighborhoods full of
children and so and then so that's
that's in some sense independent of the
psychological variables that we've been
describing and so what does the current
literature in relationship to
developmental Psychopathology have to
say about those longer term sociological
Transformations well I think that's an
excellent question isn't really being
asked in the developmental psychology
literature at least to the extent that
I've seen it recently with the
developmental psychology literature
tends to be heavily focused on sort of a
mechanistic investigation of things in
infancy or childhood with less of a
focus on those broad-based trends that
you just mentioned and I think that's
one area that needs to be improved in
the literature um obviously single
parenting has been studied um but the
role of of what you're noting these more
broad-based secular trends for example
of older parenting uh fewer children to
my knowledge at least at least in terms
of the literature scope that I have uh
looked at that recently those types of
questions aren't being asked because in
part I think the answers is is not what
the the ideologues in the academy want
to hear that that there is sort of
evidence for some of the things that
that they don't want said so um you know
the the role of younger parents and
single parenting and older parents has
to be all looked at with sort of an
equal Poise that is not really happening
right now in developmental psych and
that's one of the
limitations of developmental psych
because it's so fine grained and focused
on some of these uh more um fine-tuned
interactions like I mentioned to you
with the face tace still face and they
miss the force by focusing exclusively
on the trees and so I think we need to
get back to some of these bigger
questions um that are that are asking
why do we see a generation growing up in
the way they are with sort of an
undeniable um I guess less of an ability
to regulate their emotions than previous
generations how is how much of that is
due to actual um three things really how
much of it is due to their inborn
temperament how much of it is due to
being differences in how they were
reared but also how much of it is due to
differences in the larger cultural milu
and how that's influencing um their
decisions perhaps consciously to
regulate or not regulate their
emotions starting a business can be
tough but thanks to Shopify running your
online storefront is easier than ever
Shopify is the global Commerce platform
that helps you sell at every stage of
your business from the launch your
online shop stage all the way to the did
we just hit a million orders stage
Shopify is there to help you grow our
marketing team uses Shopify every day to
sell our merchandise and we love how
easy it is to add more items ship
products and track conversions Shopify
helps you turn browsers into buyers with
the internet's best converting checkout
up to 36% better compared to other
leading e-commerce platforms no matter
how big you want to grow shop Shopify
gives you everything you need to take
control and take your business to the
next level sign up for a $1 per month
trial period at shopify.com jbp go to
shopify.com jbp now to grow your
business no matter what stage you're in
that's shopify.com
jbp okay so so we could add some
additional variables there that need to
be considered so hi Jonathan height has
been making a strong case for the danger
of let's yeah um well yeah but but we
could expand that a bit because it's
it's there's I've talked to some of the
leaders let's say of the social media
networks about Height's concerns and you
know they made some very interesting
points is it's social media to some
degree and the intense competitiveness
abstraction and backbiting that
characterize those Realms but the thing
is it isn't obvious at all that children
and adolescents are spending the bulk of
their time on social media per se
depends on how you define it so so
they're also texting instead of
interacting face to face for example and
then they're also exposing themselves to
other content online like pornography
but then there's there's something more
fundamental I think that's often missed
which is that see when we had little
kids back in the '90s my wife and I were
the youngest parents we knew with the
oldest kids even though we weren't that
young we didn't start having kids till
we were in our late 20s now one of the
things that would happen was that we
would take our kids over to other houses
that had children and when we got there
the parents would put on a television
show for the kids to watch which I was
never happy with because what should
have happened was the kids were thrown
into the basement so to think speak and
they with nothing to do so that they had
to play and so they could watch TV and
of course they were quiet if they were
doing that but they weren't inventing
their own dramas they weren't
interacting face to face in a manner
that made them come up with the creative
conceptualizations that characterized
dramatic play like playing house for
example that lay the bloody groundwork
for future adult relationships now and
that was TV that had nothing on screens
because everyone was concerned about the
detrimental effect of TV back then but
my God now you know screens are
absolutely everywhere so the screens
have content but they also interfere
with Child's Play and so I'd like your
opinion about that and also one other
thing that I've been thinking about let
me tell me what you think about this you
know I watch all these strange identity
issues that are emerging in adolescence
and even on University campuses in early
adulthood this preoccupation with sexual
identity with gender identity and and
the and also the variant forms of even
more imaginative play that are
associated with that like the furry
culture for example and the anime
culture and what I see there is delayed
dramatic play right so I'm wondering if
what's happening to some of these kids
is that they get away from this
oppressive family environment where
they're never allowed any freedom they
burst out at say the age of 17 or 18 and
then they have to phenetically engage in
a dramatic search for identity because
they didn't do it when they were like
three which is when it really needs to
happen we radically underestimate the
significance of dramatic play then we
have dramatic play on the part of
rebellious adolescence constantly you
know as they protest in the streets
that's right 100% you know I've I've
spoken with uh uh Jonathan hay and and
others and and I've really been kind of
uh engaged in the discourse about the
role of social media you know and how
that plays into the development of
emotional regulation you're right how do
we Define that but I think your point
about you know it's basically more
broadly than just whether they're on Tik
Tok or whether they're on Facebook or
whether they're you know on on Snapchat
it's looking at a screen rather than at
another face and you see that wherever
you go I mean even when I do work on a a
supermarket Deli now on on a part-time
basis customers will come in they'll be
looking at their phone or I'll be trying
to look at my phone and it's it's a
completely different world world and
Landscape that we're now in that has
sort of um taken away the normal
face-to-face communicative um Rough and
Tumble play where you're actually
physically looking at somebody rather
than at a screen or your your attention
is not constantly looking at a screen so
it's much more broader and and I think
the other point too you said well it's
not just social media you're right it's
social media combined with um a a sec an
increasing secularism that has basically
we've lost all sense of moral constraint
so when there's no sort of when there's
sort of a a weakening of all you know
traditional classical religions and
there's no orienting structure you get
thrown into the social media world where
you can basically create anything that
gives rise to what we see is this
complete uh inability to form you know
an identity in early childhood now
they're on the screens where there's
just basically a consumer market for
identities whether that's identities as
F Furies whether it's an identity as you
know gender identity or even like you
say um I mean it's a complete
roleplaying world now that's happening
on social media and one of the
individuals who's done a lot of great
work on this is Katherine Katherine D
who default friend on on Twitter she's
looked at some of this and I think we're
missing to a certain extent and all the
discourse around the role of social
media on Mental Health you know and the
ability to establish strong identity is
the is the fact that we're now moving
into a different era where we're
actually living online rather than in
the world and that's why I've been
constantly um stressing the need for uh
Athletics based um programs or
environmental programs where children
are in nature to to get away from this
sort of movement to a world that's
completely imaginary online because that
leads to all sorts of uh Limitless
ability to establish identities that
identities that while they may exist in
this creative realm when you get back
into the real world they're they're
useless they're they're they're
dysfunctional really and that sort of
what we see well they're they're also
not subject as far as I can tell they're
also not subject to the constraints that
are characteristic of the real world
like one of the things I've been very
concerned about I'd like your thoughts
on this is
I think it was
um what's the boxer's name Mike Tyson
who so famously said the problem with
the virtual world is that it's made all
of you all too comfortable with never
getting punched when you deserve it now
that's a bad paraphrase but he did
actually say that and I think there's
something about that that's actually
very interesting and very correct you
know one of the I I don't know how many
comments I've looked at online but it's
tens of thousands you know and I've
started to develop something like a
troll
taxonomy and you know there is a culture
online they call lulls culture and
that's laugh out loud or I did it for
the lulls and it's basically a culture
of sadis sadists and Psychopaths and
this is actually quite well documented
in the relevant research literature
because there has been ongoing Research
into the personality structure of
provocative trolls and their dark t
tread types they so they'd fit into the
cluster B Psychopathology they
are um narcissistic so they want
unearned attention they're macu valan so
they use their language as a tool to
manipulate rather than to communicate
they're Psychopathic which means they're
predatory parasites and that wasn't good
enough as it turned out because that was
the dark Triad they had to add sadistic
to that and that's where the lulls
element really comes into play because
the s takes positive Delight in the
suffering of others and that's really
the nature of L's culture and it can
Thrive online because well people say
things online all the time that would
get them an immediate slap in the real
world like a requir a morally required
immediate slap and so they say things
that now this the reason that concerns
me see my sense is that we we know that
the base rate of psychopathy across
cultures is about 4%
which isn't that high but we also know
that there were historical epochs in
which the cluster B personality types
probably got the upper hand and I would
suspect that happened in the French
Revolution I think it probably happened
in the Russian Revolution probably
happened during the rise of the Nazis in
in in in uh in National Socialist
Germany you don't need that many people
to be disinhibited in their
Psychopathology before your culture
might be in grave danger and that's
particularly true if they can organize
which they can really do online and so
I'm very concerned that the incentive
structure online
facilitates dark tetrid Behavior now
there's more evidence too right because
here's another problem 25% or
thereabouts of online content is
pornographic so basically criminal right
it's basically prostitution facilitated
by electronic pimps so that's not good
and then a tremendous amount of online
activity is outright criminal right I
mean older people are just being scammed
on a like an unbelievably constant basis
and so it might be that 50% of online
activity is in the psychopathic
antisocial and cluster B realm it's very
very difficult to regulate and my
suspicions are is that spilling over in
really a really counterproductive manner
into the actual Flesh and Blood world
and so you know I'm curious about your
thoughts about that because one of the
things that's odd about you on Twitter
in a good way is that you are constantly
drawing people's attention to the
relationship between cluster B
Psychopathology and online and political
behavior and so um what do you think
about that as a hypothesis with regard
to the pathological incentive structure
of the virtual world
right maybe it's a non-playable
degenerating game like it could be well
I think in in a lot of ways that's
exactly why and I know you're familiar
with the paper that I wrote on this is
social media is an incubator of all this
cluster B type of stuff because on on
social media um you have this indirect
communicative language-based um
amplification of all these traits
whereas male aggression in the real
world it doesn't scale you have a
encounter there's something said
somebody gets you know punched in the
face and that's it what you have is on
social media indirect aggression and you
have all these traits and antagonism and
histrionic you know behavior that just
basically gets Amplified and emotionally
resonates and resonates and resonates
and Bloons out and it builds and builds
and builds and you know one of the best
examples of that is what we saw with
Hamas I mean they filmed all their
atrocities as they were going into to
Israel and that was one of the most um
you know interesting in a in a morbid
way kind of aspects of that incursion
was it was just film they they were
basically in fact doing it for the laws
regardless of whether you think on how
much atrocities or what was the exact
specific atrocities that were committed
they were filming them on GoPro for
exactly that reason and to amplify that
and so you know that is one way for a
perfect example of how this is all
spired out of control and I will I will
say for myself you know um others have
written about the cluster B stuff in
terms of political ideology and how
that's played out before um you know the
famous uh lob lki is one of them and
others so but I just see it so clearly
because when you look at the traits and
you look at what's happening online it's
a perfect incubator for all these just
to continue to amplify and amplify and
amplify without any um mechanism that
limits it and it just spills out and
then what Happ happens is you have an
event like October 7th or you have an
event like what you're seeing on these
campus tent cities all of that's
mediated and Amplified online and then
it gets played out with all this
petulant and Romer room behavior on
campuses yeah okay so let's dig into
that two ways so the first the thing I'd
like to point out and you can comment on
this if you would is that you know you
mentioned that male aggression doesn't
scale well and it doesn't work that well
in the real world and that's definitely
the case I mean one of the things that
my daughter was
often perplexed about when when she was
growing up in her household with her
brother is the difference in response
pattern to aggression between boys and
between girls so um my son and his
teenage friends would not that
infrequently have an altercation you
know sometimes it might even come to
brief blows but and that would end it
and that would of often not only not
stop a friendship but strengthen it
partly because they knew where they
stood with each other now this didn't
happen that often but the threat of it
happening was always there now with the
girls by contrast they could backbite
and gossip and Screech and moan and
and kill each other virtually
online and there was no limit to it and
there was very it was very difficult to
limit at all it's definitely the case
that female style antisocial behavior is
unbelievably difficult to regulate now
having said that I'm not blaming the
females for online pathological Behavior
although they're certainly the female
equivalent of that in places like Tick
Tock um but what I do see happening is
that the histrionic
narcissistic and borderline the men who
have those traits
can get away with that kind of female
type antisocial Behavior online that
gossiping and backbiting and reputation
Sav savaging and you know outright
mellian deception with absolutely no
consequences or even worse with a
certain level of perverse reward because
attention is brought to it and maybe
even Amplified by the social media
companies so that's not good to say the
least now let's add one more thing to
that that people need to understand so
you know the conflict between Hamas
let's say and the and the is and the
people of Israel and the rest of the
bloody world for that matter can be
construed as a political or as a
religious or economic battle but you put
your finger on something that's
absolutely vital so the cluster B types
the Psychopaths and the narcissists and
the Mau aliens they're unbelievably good
at using proclamations of victimization
to justify their
aggression and also to camouflage what
they're doing in MO with a moral story
and so like when I think of violent
religious fundamentalists I don't
actually generally think of the religion
itself as a motivation even though it
can be I think of the psychopathic power
striving narcissistic
Macallan adopting the cloak of the
religious that's what the Pharisees do
in the gospels by the way and they're
Christ's biggest enemy they adopt the
the camouflage of moral virtue religious
economic or social and then they pretend
to be the good guys well in fact they're
ravening what did Christ call them Raven
ra Raven the ravening graves that would
devour even the ancestors that they
claimed to worship and so I think that
as a culture we're radically
underestimating the
perverse consequences of the
intermingling of the cluster B
psychopathologies with the
hypothetically religious political and
economic right we're making them primary
when in fact the pathology the cluster
be pathology is probably the primary
problem so maybe when you see people
involved in sectarian violence the first
thing you should ask yourself is well is
that sectarian violence or is that just
an excuse for the the Canik narcissists
to get the upper hand so what do you
think about that I think that's exactly
right and I see the world from that from
that lens of of looking at
Psychopathology as opposed to the
background religion itself you know
clearly there's definitely historical
religious uh you know conflicts that
that motivate some of this but I see it
much more from the perspective of how
does this culture give rise to these
macrosocial what I consider contagions
of these cluster be tray and you you
mentioned lying and um you know moral
virtue and I think one of the things and
I just made this point a couple of days
ago with regards to What's Happening
Here in the states and sort of the lies
that the mainstream media have told
about Joe Biden is that there's lying
that most corrupt politicians will do uh
many people lie there's white lies and
so forth and then there's lying but
moralizing that lie and moralizing that
lie in my view is much more worse and
Psychopathic than just some lie that you
beat some kid on the street the other
day and it never happened and you see
that's the strategy that they use um
they they lie but they moralize that
they're the oppressed they're the victim
so that gives them the currency to then
create and engage in all sorts of
atrocities or behaviors that somehow are
socially acceptable um and you know you
mentioned too the the sort of male
instantiation of these cluster be traits
and that's something I saw during covid
online too a lot of the the female
Scholars that I was uh you know
collaborating with at one point or that
kind of grew to knew who were doing
covid work or pushing for the
elimination of mask mandates or saying
that lockdowns were harmful they they
were getting attacked by these male
narcissistic you know what I would
consider trolls on Twitter who had
credential degrees but they were
constantly bullying these female um
nurses doors and so forth in the most
trollish way and so that that sort of
manifestation was something that was
very glaring that would have never
played out in the real world it was only
made possible by the sort of milu of the
social environment of of of the internet
and social media and it was something
that really bothered me and so there's
this idea that you moralize that you
know a few people might be harmed by
lockdowns but the majority of the
population uh won't be uh and it's it's
the majority of the population that were
in fact
harmed the less your business spends on
operations on multiple systems and on
delivering your product or service the
more money you keep but with higher
expenses on materials employees
distribution and borrowing everything
costs more to reduce costs and headaches
smart businesses are graduating to
netsuite by Oracle netsuite is the
number one Cloud Financial system
bringing accounting financial management
inventory and HR into one platform and
one source of Truth with netw Suite you
can reduce it costs cut the cost of
maintaining multiple systems and improve
efficiency by bringing all your major
business processes into one platform and
slashing manual tasks and errors over
37,000 companies have already made the
move why haven't you by popular demand
netsuite has extended its one-of-kind
flexible financing program for a few
more weeks head to netsuite.com
sjbp that's netsuite.com sjbp
netsuite.com
jbp mhm yeah so hey so when you watched
the Hamas
atrocities and you said that what you
saw first and foremost was the pathology
okay so I want to delve into that a
little bit a because one of the things
that's really struck me about the
peculiar times that we're in is the
dissociation of atro from guilt so one
of the things that you had to give the
Nazis credit for so to speak is that
they were guilty about their crimes and
they tried to hide them and one of the
things that I see at the moment that's
so unbelievably pathological that I can
hardly get my head around it is
that The Butchery on the trans side for
example is trumpeted as a moral virtue
right there's no attempt to hide what's
going on in fact it's it's brought
forward as something that's positive now
that's associated in a way with what you
saw with regard to the Hamas massacres
is that this is actually being reveled
in again we're going to talk about this
independent of the hypothetical reasons
for the cause I mean people you just
think about it man the sadist the
sadistic
types want to claim victimization
because they're also predatory parasites
and if you're a victim then other people
have to cow out to you and take care of
you and we know that half of criminal
lifestyle is parasitical lifestyle right
there's the rule breaking and the actual
crime but the other part that's the
predation but the other part of it is
living off the work of other people in
an insanely unconscientious Manner and
coming up with a story to justify it you
know that the successful are just
thieves themselves for example or that
nobody really works to get what they
deserve there's no really such thing as
Merit there's only Power and so since
everyone's a thief there's no reason not
to get in there and get some of your own
you know and so you watched the tapes
and with the eye of a psychopathologist
and so what do you think you saw well I
what I saw was the valorization of
sadistic Behavior not just sexually
sadistic Behavior but the killing and um
Mass Slaughter of people it was sort of
meant it was meant to be propag ated on
the screen for that exact reason um to
be seen as something to be glamorized
and I think in part they they sort of
wanted to valorize it as
somehow um um in in a way it was
allowable for some sort of Oppression
that they had experienced at the hands
of you know Israeli occupation or the
situation in Gaza but you can also see
that like you say in the trans the trans
movement um online uh Tik Tock um they
they they there's a glamorization about
this stuff that is that is sort of so
widely discrepant from what is actually
happening in the actual perpetration of
in the case of the trans stuff the
mangling and the confusion of children
um and you know other negative effects
that this leads to that it's almost
something that they're trying to create
an environment where it's seen as heroic
to engage in these behaviors when in
fact it's it's just the opposite and and
that's made possible by the social media
landscape where you can click like and
you can get all the retweets and shares
or or create these Echo Chambers but the
it's a parasitic lifestyle which is
exactly what uh hery kleckley which who
who really was sort of behind the the
original construct of psychopathy that's
exactly what he identified this
parasitic lifestyle and they
moralize that type of behavior Behavior
as virtuous it's like virtuous
victimhood and it it's very toxic
virtuous victimhood valorizing sadism
you mentioned lying there's there's
lying and then there's lying that that
is there's moralization of the lie and I
see the latter moralization of the lie
as much much worse and we see that just
recently I'm sure you're aware if we had
a debate here in the states Biden and
Trump uh it it's obvious that Biden is
cognitive
really struggling and we all knew this
for many years but the mainstream media
constantly moralized this lie that it
was somehow um unfair to criticize sh
Biden for that or to acknowledge that
that's much worse in my view than you
know Trump just shooting off some
ridiculous remark it's clearly a lie but
it's it's not he's not moralizing that
lie he's not saying you're a bad person
uh because you you know you basically
observe with your own eyes what we've
all known about Biden for four years and
so I see the latter is much more
Psychopathic parasitic um and toxic to a
culture than the than the former so okay
so I'm going to tell you a frightening
story and you tell me what you think
about it this
is maybe this is too
pessimistic but I'm still working that
out you know to what degree do we have
moral instincts let's say that are in
keeping with the self sacrificing ethos
of a complex civilization how much of
that is part and parcel of our inborn
conscience you know kleckly of course
defined the Psychopaths as someone
without a conscience or with a very
underdeveloped conscience so I read two
books in quick
succession um one of them was a book by
uh the Dutch primatologist who
unfortunately is recently deceased
France DeWall one of his books on
chimpanzee Behavior I don't remember
which one because I read a number of his
books but he detailed out the um
phenomenon of chimpanzee War essentially
and this was first discovered I Believe
by Jane Goodall who was pretty um
flipped upside down by the Revelation as
she should have been because of course
the sociological types and the lefties
and the cultural constructionists like
to think that the human proclivity for
Warfare is a consequence of corrupt
social structure uh a theory which is
shot to Hell by the fact that
chimpanzees go to war which indicates
that it's much more an inherent part of
our primate nature than anyone wants to
think so what happens with the chimps is
that the juveniles in particular will go
on parties around the borders of their
territory let's say they have a fairly
acute sense of territory and if they
come across chimpanzees from another
troop and they they outnumber them
because they have a rudimentary sense of
amount anyways they can't count but they
have a sense of amount uh they'll attack
them sometimes with juvenile uh females
accompanying them and they tear them to
shreds right so what seems to be the
case is that in the absence of a social
hierarchy that
limits aggression so if a male get too
aggressive in in a troop the rest of the
troop gets upset and generally the alpha
male will step into quellet or the rest
of the troop will so you could think
about the troop's level of negative
emotion as an
inhibitory function has an inhibitory
function it clamps down on male
aggression which might otherwise have no
limit okay so why would I say No Limit
well because when you look at the
chimpanzees go to war when they're
attacking a troop member that has no
social standing which would be a member
of an other troop there's no limit to
what they'll do now chimpanzees are
capable of hunting they hunt 40 PB cbus
monkeys and they'll eat them alive while
they're screaming so it isn't obvious
that the distress of another primate has
much inhibitory force and so they'll use
their jaws to castrate the other
chimpanzees for example and literally
tear their skin off and they're very
very powerful they're very very strong
about six times as strong as the typical
adult male so look the hell out if if if
you're attacked by a chimpanzee okay so
the hypothesis there would be our
closest primate relatives have no
inhibition whatsoever on their capacity
for aggression once they're outside the
confines of a well-constituted social
hierarchy okay so soon after that I read
the rape of Nan King and which is a book
about as brutal as any book you might
ever come across and it details the
magnitude of Japanese atrocity in the
city of Nan King just prior to World War
II and there isn't you would have to be
one pathological person indeed to
imagine even in the wildest extremes of
your most vicious fantasies anything
worse than what happened in Nan King you
could take the worst possible chimpanzee
troop and equip them with a much more
more sadistic imagination and let s then
set them free to do anything they could
possibly imagine and that's what
happened in Nan King and so then I
started thinking oh my God does that
actually mean that there's no limit on
human aggression outside of like social
hierarchy essentially because you know
there were a lot of normal Japanese
soldiers that were involved in this it
was certainly contagious now undoubtedly
it was led by the bloody Psychopathic
sadistic types and it was certainly the
case that the Japanese government had
instilled in their troops a sense of uh
eth ethnic
superiority with regard to the Chinese
and and dehumanization of the Chinese
but that in itself isn't enough to
account for this stunning sadistic
brutality and so you know that would
indicate
that well what does it
indicate it indicates that that
psychopathic and sadistic tendency might
be a lot more transmissible than we
think at at minimum yeah I think the the
abolition of uh hierarchies has led to
worse hierarchies in almost every
situation and and historical
circumstance we can think of hierarchies
are an ingrain part of human behavior
and when you try to replace them with
some other utopian scheme where there is
no hierarchy or dominance hierarchy what
you end up with is what you just
described and I think um that's really
what the tyranny of structurelessness is
all about when there is no hierarchy or
guiding set of um principles to create a
hierarchy you just have complete
structurelessness and to think about it
that's what you see in all this cluster
be Behavior it's completely disregulated
there's no structure to any of their
behavior and that's really what's at the
heart of I think the cultural malays
that we're living through is that all
these ideologues want to abolish
structure or categories whether that's
categories in mental health diagnostic
classifications law in in society um and
you see this with some of the lgbqt Plus
3,00 World things they want to abolish
any type of constraint and as Reef one
of the cultural commentators Philip Reef
who is no longer with us once you have a
culture in which
uh man is allowed to express anything
you have a culture in crisis you have no
constraints on the ability of anybody to
live any pathology they want or do
anything they want there's nothing no
hierarchy no containment at all to some
of the underlying uh tyrannical behavior
that can be given rise to when you have
a lack of structure or containment um so
we you have a culture in crisis right
now because they're they're trying to
abolish all structure all Containment
all hierarch and that's just a recipe
for cultural disintegration all right so
okay so so on that note let's turn to
the more particularly personal so I sat
on a lot of University hiring committees
at Harvard and at the University of
Toronto and I've evaluated a lot of CVS
and your CV is is good it might be very
good you have an age index of 34 which
means that you have 34 papers with more
than 34 citations and so that's at
minimum respectable and a citation count
of about 5,000 and for those of you
listening scientific productivity and
Merit is
Quantified not least by observing how
many other scientists site someone's
work that is refer to it in their own
writing and their own research now it's
not a perfect measure because you can be
cited for being um hyper poopular in a
sense or you can be Ed for publishing an
erroneous paper that people are required
to refer to but by and large citation
count is actually a good predictor of
future productivity it's about the best
predictor we have actually that in pure
number of papers and so number of
well-sited papers is also a good
indicator so by on Purely objective
grounds you know you're a contender
let's say and you can obviously speak
and you can obviously think and you're
very interested in research and so we
might ask
ourselves why aren't you employed in the
academy and so do you want to tell that
story and you were at the University of
Toronto in the Psychiatry Department
tell everyone what happened and and how
things ended up for you and why as far
as you're concerned I think there's a
number of different things that I've
thought obviously I have no specific
answers to why I'm not in the Academy I
have a number of different takes on why
that may be but um a couple of different
things a lot of my early work was in
attachment and that's a very nuanced
field of of research that is you know
has its own people in the academy that
do that kind of work and so forth and so
on um another reason is that I'm very
strident in what I believe and what I
say and what I feel and if you're a
white male and and especially in
Psychology and you're strident and
you're you tend to be a little bit more
outspoken that's seen as uh being too
agreeable once you get on faculty
interviews of which I've been on many it
becomes a personality contest and I
think in retrospect I've been told
things like I don't smile enough on
faculty interviews or other outlandish
things that have nothing to do with my
Merit I'm sure that there's been faculty
interviews or job market searches where
I've given talks that haven't been great
as other talks so you never know the
real reason why you don't end up in the
academy or you end up not not not
staying in it as far as sort of where
I'm at now when I was at the University
of Toronto and working you know at the
medical hospital that I was there it was
during that period of time where things
were getting ve very woke especially
around the gender stuff I was working
with people who you know they claim to
be scientists who are rigorous and and
you have they them and their bios and
that to me was just outlandish I mean
how can you be at a medical research
hospital purporting an ideology that is
totally disconnected from what we know
about human sexual development um so I
spoke out about that I spoke out about
things on X like land acknowledgements
and how they were just absolutely
ridiculous um and they were they were
being forced on people um and I think
that didn't make things that didn't make
things sort of uh go well for me I I
have to say though that others have been
canceled way worse than than I was I
don't have a typical cancellation story
you have an invisible canel cancellation
story and I actually think in some ways
that's worse look one one of the reasons
I stopped working at the University of
Toronto was because well graduate
students were interested in working with
me but the whole point of having a
graduate research student fundamentally
if they're really research oriented is
so that they can go off and have their
own research lab and pursue an academic
career and I knew with 100% certainty
that any of the Caucasian males that
worked with me or perhaps any females
for that matter would be so tainted by
their mere association with me that the
probability that they would ever get an
interview even let alone a job was
essentially zero and so how in the world
can I offer a person a position even if
they're interested in working with me on
those grounds and I know perfectly well
that a fair bit of that is racial so if
you're Caucasian you're much less likely
to get an interview at the same degree
of Merit 100 that's 100% true and it's
also true when it comes to um gender so
you're much less likely to get an
interview if you're male and so I also
didn't want to partake in that anymore
it's like go to hell you sons of
if that's what you want you think I need
you you've got another think coming and
so that I don't know you know I read
recently that
94% of the 300,000 jobs that
were distributed in the aftermath of GE
George Floyd's death went
to nonwhite males non white non- males
right sorry I'm still not getting that
right if you were white and male you
didn't get one of those jobs put it that
way right and so that's inexcusable in
my way of looking at things because I
also know because I've done extensive
work in psychometrics that we can assess
Merit especially in the scientific realm
with a fair degree of accuracy and the
best way to do that as we already
discussed is by just looking at
publication record back before the whole
godamn publication system has also
become corrupt Beyond Comprehension so
you know you say you didn't get
cancelled that hard which means you
escaped without overt reputational
damage that was made public but you
don't have a bloody job and so that
doesn't seem so minor to me given that
you have a stellar academic record that
you're obviously someone who's genuinely
interested in research and those people
aren't that common and so where are you
working now so I I would see myself as
you know having a soft cancellation what
I've done is I've come back I've tried
to build my social media platform and
prior to to me leaving Toronto I had
numerous students reach out to me wanted
research um you know uh um you know
mentorship and so forth and those
students came to me via the normal
channels that you would when you're sort
of a professor at an institution and I
you know I got so many emails I I didn't
know what to do with them all I said
look the the the more High Merit ones
that I saw I could see from their CVS I
said you know if you're interested in
getting some experience and you want to
do it on an involuntary basis and just
kind of work with me offline and you
know through some of the projects that I
have ongoing uh feel free to do so many
took me up on that offer I had them
write substack pieces and tried to
improve their writing skills in that way
and some still do kind of engage with me
we're doing a meta analysis that I had
started but as far as my current work
it's kind of hard because you have to
have some sort of income so I've kind of
take a part-time job at ad Deli cut some
meat um I I see the workingclass culture
I'm sort of in there but it's very
difficult in the sense that to go from
the sort of intellectual world to the
blue collar world it is a dramatic
change and you can't be as dialed into
all the sort of Rapid Pac intellectual
stuff that's going on now and so that's
really what I'm finding challenging and
difficult but it is my love of research
that has kept me in this and my students
have kept me in this the ones that reach
out to me uh via Twitter uh via email or
who have just seen what I've said on
Twitter and email me independently
saying we thank you so much for speaking
out because a lot of the younger
students whether they're undergraduates
or early graduate students they don't
have any either they don't have the
temperament to speak out or they they
they don't feel that they can and giving
them a voice has been hugely influential
for me um and so I I guess right now I'm
in sort of this transitional state where
I I am slated to do some online teaching
in the fall at my alma moer the
University of Miami um teaching some
stats there um and and that's you know I
I feel very empowered to do that and and
continuing to work with my students but
other Wise It's just speaking out and
trying to build your independent
platform another thing that that I that
I had happen is that through my substack
writing uh a Pacific Legal team picked
up um a case on my behalf we sued the
University of Santa Cruz for their Dei
statement requirement which all
professors typically have to submit now
as part of their job applications and
that's still in the mix um it's now with
the judge um there was a motion to
dismiss but that case is one that we we
we filed sort of saying that look Dei
statements are a form of compelled
speech and you're seeing now a lot of
push back on the Dei statements um and
so I'm hoping that my case um you know
whether the the case is dismissed or not
will continue to to work against it but
that's been hugely influential to me to
see some of the legal stuff that goes on
behind the scenes and how badly there is
sort of this reverse discrimination uh
in Dei statements which are nothing more
than political litness tests and they
filter out if you're not on board with
social justice or Equity or any of that
stuff forget it so for me that was just
pointless why apply when I have to
submit stuff that I don't believe in and
I'm not someone who you know that would
sit well with me so I I want to sleep
well at night and sleeping well at night
means staying true to who you are and
what you believe and and I'd rather do
that and and you know work at a deli
than than have a position where people
around me are saying outlandish things
or they're they're sort of walking the
walk and they don't believe any of the
stuff that they've said you know
socially well it's death for scientists
because look well okay two things first
of all you know I've seen very little
evidence in our discussion so far that
you're particularly stridden I've seen
plenty of evidence that you're trying to
do your research and you're trying to go
where you it takes you and that you are
doing that in a manner that's more
overtly conservative than the manner
that might characterize the demented
progressives and the outright bloody
cowardly Liars that aggregate in the
psychology field at the moment so
there's that so strident like I don't
see any evidence of that at all in your
comportment you know I've interviewed
lots of people like 500 people for
YouTube alone and so and I've sat on
many um you know juridical committees
trying to evaluate potential candidates
and there isn't a single bit of behavior
that you manifested today that I would
put in the strident camp in fact when
you're discussing not only your research
preoccupations and your beliefs but
what's happened in your own personal
life you're remarkably reserved and
careful in your choice of words so
that's just rubbish it seems to me much
more that you know you ran into the
trouble that you ran into because you
wouldn't go along with the lies and
that's what one of the things we should
point out to people who are watching and
listening is that that that's the death
of the scientific Enterprise right
because the only only thing that makes
science true is the truth seeking
behavior on the part of scientists you
can falsify your data at every level in
its recording in its statistical
analysis in its presentation at
conferences in its publication and
papers in your public discussions of it
you can lie nonstop at all of those
levels if all you're do if you're
incompetent or all you're doing is
pushing your career forward because
there's no objective truth and you're
not oriented right to the bloody core of
your soul for truth you're definitely
not a scientist CU it's actually hard to
be a scientist and it rubs against the
grain you know I mean I had students who
lost two years work because we wouldn't
publish a paper that they weren't able
to replicate you know there's a rule in
my lab is you don't get to publish your
study even if it works unless you can
replicate it and so it would have been
much easier on the students and
certainly better for me in that narrow
sense of career provision if I would
have just let my students publish the
first paper that they had positive
results
with but it but that's you know not
acceptable because it pollutes
literature and if you believe in truth
you don't want to do that if you don't
want to pursue a godamn lie for the rest
of your life too because you've been
such an idiot as an as a as a graduate
student you allowed yourself to get
duded into believing that you found
something when you didn't
so I I you know I despair of the academy
putting itself back together on the
research side I mean again that's pretty
damn pessimistic but I don't see an
alternative to it at the moment so it's
not surprising you're on the outs I I I
really have become much more pessimistic
as well and even some of the students
that work with me now on an independent
basis I mean you know I teach them a lot
of skills that are Relentless in terms
of um you know when you do a meta
analysis you have to do a a complete
literature review that's very detailed
and systematic and and they're learning
those skills but it's m it's it's a very
um aggressive and Relentless pace and
they're they're you know they're
learning how to do good research there's
no there's no immediate payoff but
that's really how the academy is being
degraded now with a lot of what's
happening is there's no there's no
attention to detail there's no
scientific rigor and it's just anything
goes and even when there is scientific
rigor in the sense of uh appropriate
methodology it's being laundered around
ideologies where you might do a study
there's a recent uh thread I did on
Twitter where there's sort of a a study
on scales of identity dysfunction and of
course what you find in these scales is
that there is a structure of identity
dysfunction It's associated with all
this negative mental health stuff but
when it comes to gender identity the
authors in the discussion talk about how
well we can't evaluate these
associations in this you know in in the
gender diverse population because
they're not cisnormative and so that's
sort of a soft normalization of of
Psychopathology in view it's not it's
not true scientific research they they
see what they what they see in terms of
the statistics and then they try to
write it off by defining a population as
somehow deserving of less scrutiny or
diff different scrutiny and that's
really to me um even if you want to take
that view you have to be you know have
to demonstrate equalise about what
you're doing and they don't do that I
think that word Cy is a
curse I hated that word when it first
popped up I knew exactly what those
godamn lefties were up to with that
Progressive radicals were up to with the
misuse of language in that regard I was
just going to say CIS is basically the
elimination of structure it's basically
defining sort of a normative and trying
to eliminate any sort of hierarchy or
any sort of structure to what we've
understood in the in the natural world
for a long time and that gets back to
what we were earlier talking about it's
complete abolition of structure um the
complete abolition of any definition of
normativity and when you do that at
scale you have a culture in crisis so
here I've got a a horrible one final
horrible hypothesis for you so you tell
me what you think about this so you know
that if you're marginal you're likely to
occupy a lower rung socioeconomically
and your and your existence in some
fundamental sense is much more likely to
be tenuous so if you occupy a lower rung
in a hierarchy you're more likely to
develop cardiovascular disease and
you're more likely to be unemployed and
you're more likely to be me mentally ill
and you're more likely to have an
alcohol and drug problem of course
there's a bidirectional causal
relationship so you can imagine a
structure with something at the center
and then rungs circles concentric
circles of
marginalization radiating outward from
that Center okay so now imagine this you
could think of the world as thesis and
antithesis right there are things and
their opposites but that's not right
there are things and a plurality of
opposites now imagine you try to make
the marginalized Central which is the
big postmodern push let's bring the
margin to the center well that's fine
except the margin is a
plurality so now you're hypothesizing
that you can make a plurality a Unity
which you can't and that's why the lgbtq
ETC mob continues to expand its
nomenclature because 's no limit to the
plurality there's literally no limit to
the plurality okay so what does that
imply well let's say you bring the
marginal to the center but now that
doesn't Center all the marginal because
the marginal is an infinite plurality
and so what that means is that when you
bring the marginal to the center you
just get a new margin but that new
margin is even more marginal so let's
say that's the addition of T to LGB
okay now the question is when you bring
the even more marginal to the center who
do you
destroy do you destroy the center or do
you destroy the previously marginal and
the answer to that seems to me given the
vulnerability of the marginal is that
when you bring the Fringe Of The Fringe
In you destroy The Fringe not the
center so I and I don't see a way out of
that because if The Fringe are already
compromised
because of the multiple forms of stress
and the even more Fringe come in like at
at some point as you go out into the
Fringe you're past The Fringe you're
into the bloody
monstrous this is what happened to the
Scottish prime minister when she decided
that all men who said they were women
were women and so then made political
moves to
allow you know Psychopathic rapists to
claim that they women and to go into
women's prisons the naivity of these
people or their malevolence is really
without bounds it's like you have no
idea what you're encouraging and this is
one of the advantages or disadvantages
of being a psychopathologist like I've
seen and studied some of the worst forms
of human behavior and I have some real
sense of just exactly what'll happen if
you destroy all hierarchical structure
you know and you saw this after the rut
Revolution and the French Revolution all
the useful idiots lose their heads
first so there's a warning to those who
want to extend the alphabet Brigade
Beyond any reasonable limit it's like
will you wait till you get to the real
monsters boys and girls and you're damn
close now they'll come out under their
rocks and you wish you'd never been born
that's exactly right and I've spoken out
about pluralism on on X as well you're
seeing that pluralism language in
developmental Psychopathology is somehow
lauded uh pluralism is being described
as the new wave of you know you have
plural pluralism as in methodology but
you have pluralism in um in integrating
lived experience into our understanding
of mental illness and what ends up
happening and I've said this in these
exact words is unmitigated pluralism is
idiographic insanity it's just you have
a thousand my thousand my truths and
there's no truth it just it spirals
completely out of control and that's
exactly the language that is being used
in developmental Psychopathology right
now pluralism that's laed but that's
going to lead to completely you know at
the end of the day that's going to lead
to no Psychopathology at all everybody's
going to be living their own
Psychopathology or their own
idiosyncrasy and you won't be allowed to
categorize them as somehow disordered or
somehow uh non-normative and so
Christopher lash one of our great
cultural commentators of all time he
basically pointed this out it's it's
it's a pluralist utop and it never works
and so you have you reach a threshold
where you have so many plurals and it's
just Insanity I mean we see this now
even on on on social media the plurals
movement is this sort of the idea that
you have all these plurals that assume
multiple identities online and it's just
complete nonsense but it's being given a
patina of credibility by this lunacy in
the academy where I don't know if
they're doing it intentionally in some
pluralism it might be good if you're
like a methodologist and you want to
have different methodologies to sort of
test something out but that's not what
they mean it's much more of an
ideological political project all right
sir look um I think we should probably
close with that so um I'd like to keep
in touch I'm obviously following you was
assiduously on Twitter because as I said
you're one of the few voices in the
psychological community that that's
willing to Jesus to point out the
obvious I'm so appalled by my colleagues
I'm so as ashamed especially of the
psychopathologists because they should
know better and the developmental
psychologists too they know perfectly
well that what's being foisted on us in
terms of gender affirming care and the
rewriting of the rules around the
classification of Psychopathology they
know perfectly well and and the whole
notion that
um we should do anything other than wait
in the case of kids with gender
dysphoria who are primarily depressed
and anxious and victims of their
pathological parenting we all know that
all psychologists with their salt know
that Bloody bunch
of Silent cowards and so you know so
you're working at a deli at least you've
got your tongue and that's that's
attached that's the thing that's
attached directly to your soul so you
know good on you as far as I'm concerned
and I hope that you keep scrapping away
my suspicions are that things will turn
around for you quite dramatically when
they do turn around and at least in 20
years you're not going to have to be
sitting there thinking and geez you
remember when all those young girls were
getting their breasts cut off and I was
fully for it or too damn cowardly to say
anything about it it's like at least you
had
enough of a spine and a spirit
to put your money where your mouth is
and so you know that's very rare in
today's world and so I salute you for it
seriously good work certainly you're the
you're one of the ones that has uh
really compelled everybody to speak out
more and I certainly have been
influenced by a lot of your speaking out
but yeah I mean that's what allows me to
sleep at night I don't I'm not going to
sit back and and and watch this unfold
and and not be able to speak out about
it and you know I'll have to deal with
whatever challenges um and and I don't
mean to imply that I have you know
extensive challenges certainly there's
people that have many more but it is
hard not to be part of the research not
to be part of the the millu but I I I
don't see any other way um I don't see
any other way except to continue to
speak out and build your platform and
hope for things to to to turn around all
right sir so for everybody watching and
listening I'm going to continue my
conversation with Dr haligan on The
Daily wi side of things um not exactly
sure what we'll delve into there
probably I'd like to find out a little
bit more about the students that he
still has and how he's managing to
continue his developing his social media
Network and and and what he thinks about
the return of amateur scientists you
know when the scientific Endeavor
emerged mostly or M much much of it in
Great Britain a lot of the founders of
the disciplines we have now were amateur
scientists who actually did scientific
work on their own and you know for a
while the universities were capable of
protecting the eccentrics who had that
kind of drive for knowledge and that was
their damn job that was the job of the
secretaries and the administrators
instead of voting their idiot opinions
on the faculty members who are trying to
pursue truth and so maybe we'll see a
return to something like that you know
what independent science that means
we'll have to do something about the way
science is published but that doesn't
seem like an insurmountable obstacle to
me so anyways we'll talk about that more
on the daily wire side of things thank
you very much Dr halan and to everybody
watching listening the film crew here in
uh up in the Wilds of Ontario appreciate
your work today too thank you sir thank
you
[Music]